We all have heard about gerrymandering by now, but I've been dissatisfied with the current state of analysis of the fairness of Congressional districts. Specifically, proportionality is something that sounds fair in the abstract, but might result in suboptimal districts in a system where districts are drawn geographically (consider a state with a strong, uniform political lean; in this case, it would make sense for more districts to agree with that lean than the statewide proportional result).  

So, how many Congressional districts _should_ lean toward each party in any given state?  This is an attempt to answer that question by considering the partisanship of the nearest neighbors of each precinct.

The thesis is that rather than expecting a Congressional delegation to have a partisan lean equal to the statewide election results, it should have a partisan lean equal to the partisan lean of the precinct-level results, adjusted for the most compact possible district that could be drawn around each precinct.  To make this determination, the code herein draws the most compact possible Congressional district around each precinct in a state.  It does so by iteratively adding precincts to a hypothetical Congressional district centered on the subject precinct.  In each iteration, the geographic neighbors of the precincts already in the district are added to the district.  The iteration stops when the district contains at least as much population as the expected population of one Congressional district in the state.  Once that occurs, the district's partisan lean is determined.  This adjusted partisan lean is calculated for all precincts, and from there it is simple to scale the number of precincts whose most compact district has a particular partisan lean down to an equal proportion of the number of Congressional districts in the state.

Currently, I've only run the algorithm on Massachusetts and Wisconsin (I haven't found a data set I like for a nationwide analysis).  These states were chosen because they are both states where a proportional result might not be a fair result: Massachusetts is a state where the minority party has no compact Congressional district-size area of strength, meaning it's unrealistic to expect one third of Massachusetts Congressional districts to elect representatives from that party (and it might even be fair for no Congressional districts to lean toward the minority party); Wisconsin is a state split evenly but with extreme geographic polarization between its two large cities and its rural areas, forcing a choice between proportionality and not splitting the cities into multiple Congressional districts.

You should be able to just clone the repo and run `python3 massachusetts.py` or `python3 wisconsin.py` to see the results for yourself.  You may have to pip install pysal first.

They indicate that 99.1% of Massachusetts precincts would form the center of a Democratic-leaning congressional district.  Massachusetts has nine Congressional districts, so if this algorithm is a fair adjuticator of fairness, it indicates that most fair redistricting outcomes would result in nine Democratic leaning districts, and no fair redistricting outcome would see more than one Republican-leaning district.  27.2% of Wisconsin precincts would form the center of a Democratic-leaning Congressional district, though, so by this algorithm one would expect only two (or maybe three) of Wisconsin's eight districts to elect Democrats.

Limitations of this analysis include:
- its results will be skewed when the population and geography of precincts correlate.  This is somewhat the case in Wisconsin.  As an extreme example, consider a hypothetical state with 100 compact, adjacent rural precincts of 100 voters each and 1 urban precinct of 10000 voters.  Because there are more rural precincts, the algorithm would likely indicate that the statewide result should favor their preference.

Data used for this analysis:
- Massachusetts:
  - Shapefile of precincts: [MassGIS](https://www.mass.gov/info-details/massgis-data-wards-and-precincts)
  - 2018 Senate election results by precinct: [MIT Election Data and Science Lab](https://github.com/MEDSL/2018-elections-official/blob/master/SENATE/SENATE_precinct_general.zip)
- Wisconsin:
  - Shapefile of precincts and election results: [Wisconsin state legislature](https://data-ltsb.opendata.arcgis.com/datasets/LTSB::2012-2020-election-data-with-2020-wards/explore?location=44.715441%2C-89.815220%2C8.00&showTable=true)

I used the 2018 Senate election for Massachusetts data because it is the post-2016 election that saw the weakest performance of any winning statewide candidate; I used 2020 presidential data for Wisconsin because the result was so close.
